Neil,
welcome to the show.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
I has been hoping to have this conversation for years and with a flashback for,
you know,
10,
15,
by 20 plus years I've been reading your work.
I can't say that about many people I've ever met
and I mean you've been asking me incredibly politely,
um,
if I could do the podcast or anything vaguely
edging around it and giving me open invitations for,
for a good decade.
It's this true.
Um,
you know,
and I love the fact that we've managed to do the occasional tiny goofy thing I
got,
I got to do,
read a page of your book.
That's right.
You read a page of the book,
which was incredible because I find your voice as many people do rather
hypnotic.
And then we got to do a very short chapter in tribe of mentors.
The last book,
thank you very much for answering those questions.
And uh,
it's,
it's just such a,
such a thrill to be able to spend time with you.
I'm loving it.
And I thought,
I thought we could begin with the,
the glorious beginnings.
And maybe for those people who can't see this,
I'll give some context.
I have not just one recorder but two,
three,
four different sets of audio.
And that's in part because I was a or am once bitten,
twice shy when it comes to audio.
And then you shared one of your early days stories.
What happened?
Oh,
so,
um,
when I was 15,
I really wanted to meet and talk to writers and artists I admired and I couldn't
figure out how you did this.
I didn't know about conventions.
If there were conventions back in 1975,
76.
Um,
so I had a brilliant idea.
I would start a magazine.
The magazine as far as I was consent and even have to exist.
The fact that it went on to exist was really fun.
And we called it metro.
Um,
which was the name I came up with because it sounded like a magazine.
It didn't just sound like a magazine.
It sounded like a magazine that you have heard of.
And I love the fact that over the years,
metro magazines around the world actually do exist now,
but in 1975,
they didn't,
but I could phone up and say,
what from Metro magazine?
And people go,
Oh yeah,
you know,
I've always just had broken.
So over the phone,
nobody knew that we were 15.
Um,
and I remember interviewing,
uh,
Michael Moorcock,
who was an author whose work I loved with,
with my friend Dave Dixon,
who told me recently he just found the tape and is threatening to put it up as
some kind of glorious podcasts,
which I really hope he does.
Um,
15 year old,
the old game.
And then Dave Dickson interviewing Michael Moorcock.
Um,
but the,
the one that taught me my lesson was the,
I think it was the second interview we did,
we'll cook was the first.
Um,
and it was Roger Dean and Roger Dean is an artist and designer most famous back
then for the covers of yes,
albums,
this beautiful sort of calligraphy and these floating islands and things like
that.
And I got talking to some kid on the train who said,
Oh yeah,
you know,
I know Roger Dean.
And so we found up budgeting publisher,
which was basically a Roger Dean,
I think they were called Dragon's dream.
And uh,
said,
you know,
like 20 interview Roger went down to Brighton.
Um,
I remember the sheer amazement and joy of these paintings that were,
as far as I was concerned,
iconic religious emblem stay.
They were,
you know,
I,
and I didn't like,
yes,
very much.
In fact,
I didn't really like much of the music that he'd done covers too,
but I had a copy of his book views and just loved it.
There was a painting he did of some badges.
There was just these things.
Um,
it felt very lord of the rings.
It felt very fantastical and there were these amazing paintings covered in dust,
propped up against walls and we interviewed him.
And at the end of the interview I noticed that the tape wasn't going round and
got home,
played it.
And you can hear this 30 seconds of us talking.
There's 30 seconds of us talking in higher and higher pitched voices faster and
faster,
like mad chipmunks and then it stops.
And that was the Roger Dean interview and I,
and the great thing about that was when seven years later I really was a
journalist.
I really was going around interviewing people.
I was interviewing people for magazines that existed and um,
you know,
had existed before we decided to do the interviews and things.
Um,
I always carried spare batteries.
I always carried spare tapes
if I could,
you know,
at the point I could afford to,
I even carried a spam micro cassette recorder just in case
Justin Case two is one and one is none as they say sometimes.
And I said the gods,
the gods gifted you with a malfunction early.
Exactly.
One good malfunction and you learn your lesson.
This,
that pain thing.
And we were chatting before we sat down to record as I was gathering copious
beverages,
water and tea and so on for us,
I said,
I'm using the royal us,
I suppose firstly for me.
And I got water too.
And we were talking about this location downtown where we're sitting and I've,
I've decided in the last few years to use locations outside of my home for a lot
of what I do because I found it,
uh,
that is it being sitting at my kitchen table doing a lot too sometimes produce
them.
Malays this is this odd association or lack of dissociation between work and
home.
And I had read at one point that Maya Angelou and I hope I'm getting that
pronunciation right,
would rent hotel rooms to work on a lot of her writing.
And then you brought up another name.
So I'm back in about 1997 I read an article by Ian Fleming.
He wrote the James Bond books about how he wrote the James Bond books
and you read this article and you realize something which is Ian Fleming did not
enjoy the process of writing.
Um,
I was always fascinated by the fact that that
several of Roald Dahl's,
most famous short stories were plotted by and Fleming Fleming would really,
yeah,
he gave Dowel,
no idea.
The two best short story twists,
which our lamb to the slaughter where the woman kills her husband with a leg of
lamb and then cooks it,
um,
and feeds it to the detective who is going,
I cannot figure out what he was hit with a is any inflowing plot.
And so is the one about the evil antique dealer who finds this amazing antique,
um,
in on some farm and decides to cheat the farmers and explains it.
Well,
the thing isn't worth any money,
but the legs,
the legs are worth some money.
So I'll,
uh,
I'll give you a,
you know,
20 quid for the legs,
um,
and is about to take away this million pound a antique thing and the farmers
helpfully rip off the legs and throw the rest of it away.
You made this easier for you and uh,
and those plots were both the and plantings and you start realizing,
oh,
you really don't like writing when you read his thing on how he wrote the gins
been books.
Uh,
you read a James Bond book into weeks,
you check into a hotel,
you have to check into a hotel somewhere that you don't want to be.
Otherwise you might go out and walk around and become a tourist.
You have to check into a not terribly nice hotel room,
otherwise he might luxuriate men enjoy it and instead what you want to be is
focused on getting out
and then you having nothing else to do in this town in this place.
You settle down and you write like a fiend and you get your James Bond book
written in two weeks and you leave this horrible hotel room and that was how he
did it and I have tried it a couple of times.
I did it with the American draft of Neverwhere.
That was the first one I ever tried and I did the entire
set of American draft,
which was a big second drug.
The book had already been published in the UK,
but my American editor wanted stuff done because she pointed out that the book
as it existed was written for people who knew,
knew that Oxford street was a big street with lots of shops on it and you know
it or whatever it was written for Brits and Londoners and she wanted something
expanded.
So I expanded it.
Um,
and I was in a room with as far as I remember,
no windows in the,
I think it was a Marriott in the World Trade Center and um,
which is no longer there.
But writing in that hotel room,
you just wanted to be out
and it's,
it seems to me,
and you can't believe everything you read on the Internet,
so I want you to certainly fact check me as needed,
but that you,
you also
have or have had some internal rules so you can,
you can use your external environment to assist.
But,
but I read,
uh,
that and again,
feel free to correct,
but making rules the importance of making rules,
rules.
Like,
you can sit here and write or you can sit here and do nothing,
but you can't sit here and do anything else.
That,
that was always and still is when I go off.
Right.
That's my biggest role.
Could you speak to that?
Yeah.
Because
um,
I would go down to my lovely little gazebo,
the bottom of the garden sit down and I'm absolutely allowed not to do anything.
I'm allowed to sit at my desk.
I'm allowed to stare out at the world.
I'm allowed to do anything.
I
as long as it isn't anything,
not allowed to do a crossword,
not allowed to read a book,
a clamp to phone a friend out loud to,
you know,
make a claim model of something I,
all I'm allowed to do is absolutely nothing or right.
And what I love about that is I'm giving myself permission to write or not
write,
but writing is actually more interesting than doing nothing.
After a while,
you know,
you sort of sit there and you've been staring out the window now for five
minutes and it kind of loses its child going.
Well actually,
might as well write something.
And um,
and it's hard.
I'm,
as a writer,
I'm more easily distractable.
Um,
I have a three year old son.
He is the epitome of cuteness and charm.
He's more fun playing with him than it is writing,
which means if I'm going to be writing,
I need to do it somewhere where I don't have a three year old son singing to me,
asking me to read to him,
demanding my attention.
Um,
and I think that's it.
I think it's a really just a solid rule for writers.
It's like,
yeah,
you don't have to write,
you have permission to not.
Right.
But you don't have permission to do anything else.
That reminds me of another one of my favorite writers.
You being the one who is sitting in front of me,
uh,
John McPhee,
nonfiction writer,
uh,
who has spent much of his life in Princeton,
New Jersey,
but has written some incredible pilled surprise winning nonfiction.
And I was lucky enough to take class with him a thousand years ago.
And his,
his rule was very similarly.
It didn't state it explicitly who would sit in front of his first as a young man
typewriter and you could sit in front of the blank page and from 8:00 AM to 6:00
PM,
with the exception of a break for lunch and swimming,
it was the blank page or writing.
It's disallowed from doing anything else.
Are there any other rules or practices that you also hold sacred or important
for your writing?
Ah,
some of them,
uh,
just things for me for example,
um,
most of the time,
not always.
I will do my first draft in fountain pen,
um,
because I actually enjoy the process of writing with a fountain pen.
I like the,
um,
I like filling a fountain pen.
I uncapping it.
I like the weight a bit in my hand.
I like that thing.
So I'll have a notebook.
Um,
I'll have a fountain pen and I'll write if I'm doing anything wrong.
If I'm working on a novel,
for example,
I will always have to fountain pens on the go at least with two different
colored inks at least because that way I can see at a glance how much work I did
that day.
I can just look down and go look it up.
Five pages in brown I that I wrote that half a page in black.
That was not a good day.
Um,
nine pages in blue come.
That was what a great day.
Um,
I,
I you can just sort of get a sense of,
okay,
are you,
are you working?
Are you making forward progress?
Um,
what's actually happening?
And I also love that because it emphasizes for me that nobody is ever meant to
read your first draft.
Your first draft can go way off the rails.
Your first draft can absolutely go up in flames.
It can,
you can change the age,
gender,
number of a character.
You can bring somebody dead back to life.
Nobody ever needs to know anything that happens in your first draft.
Is you
telling the story to yourself?
And then I'll sit down and tight and I'll put it onto a computer.
Um,
as far as I'm going to send the second draft is where I try and make it look
like I knew what I was doing all along.
Do you edit then as you're looking or translating from the first draft on the
page to the computer?
Or do you get it all down as is in the computer and then edit?
Oh No,
I definitely,
that's my editing process.
I figure that's my second draft is typing into the computer and also I love,
um,
so backing up a bit here,
when I was,
what was I 27,
28 in the days when we were still in typewriters and there were just a handful
of people with word processes,
which were clunky things with disks,
which didn't hold very much and stuff.
I edited an anthology
and uh,
enjoyed editing minds,
don't you?
Most of the stories that came in were about 3000 words long
move forward in time,
not much,
five,
six,
seven years,
mid nineties.
Everybody is now on computer.
And I edited [inaudible] Short Story on felony and the stories that were coming
in tended to be somewhere between six and 9,000 words long
and they can't really have much more story than the 3000 words once.
And I realized that what was happening is it's a,
it's a sort of a computery thing is if you're typing,
putting stuff down his work,
if you've got a computer,
adding stuff is not work.
Choosing his work.
So it sort of expands a bit like a gas.
If you have two things you could say,
you say both of them,
if you have the stuff you want to add,
you add it.
And,
and I thought,
okay,
I have to not do that because otherwise my stuff is going to balloon and it will
become gaseous and thin.
Um,
so what I love,
if I've written something on a computer and I decide to lose a chunk,
it feels like I've lost work.
If I delete a page and a half,
I feel like there's a page and a half.
It just went away.
And that that's a piece of the House with the work I've just lost.
If I'd been writing in a notebook and I'm typing it up and I can look at
something go,
I don't need this page and a half
and I believe it out.
I've just saved myself work and it feels kind of like I'm,
I'm treating myself.
So I'm just trying to always have in my head the idea that maybe I'm somehow on
some cosmic level paying somebody by the word in order to be allowed to write
that,
that if they're there,
they should matter,
they should mean something.
And so it was important to me.
And you mentioned,
uh,
you mentioned distraction earlier and you're dangerously adorable son,
which,
which I certainly agree with.
Uh,
I had read somewhere,
I actually,
before I get to that,
this,
this might seem like a very,
very mundane question,
but what type of notebooks do you prefer?
They large like legal pans.
Are they leather-bound what type of note?
Um,
when they came out,
I really liked,
I,
I've used a whole bunch of different ones.
I bought big drawing ones,
which actually turned out to be a bit too big.
Oh,
I kind of liked how much I could see on the page.
Uh,
those were the ones I wrote,
star dust and m and American gods in sort of,
you know,
big size,
but they weren't terribly portable.
I went over to the mole skins,
um,
and I loved them when they first came out and then they dropped their paper
quality and dropping paper quality doesn't matter unless you're writing and
fountain pen because all of a sudden it's bleeding through and all of a sudden
you're writing on one page,
leaving a page blank because it's bled through and writing on the next page.
Um,
and Joe Hill,
about a six or seven years ago,
uh,
Joe Hill,
that the wonderful horror fantasy writer,
um,
suggested the loyal to them to me.
And,
um,
so my usual notebook right now,
it's a lawyer term because I really like the,
the way you can pension rate stuff in them and the thickness of the paper and
that just like sort of mole skins,
but the push of moles hair,
they're just better.
Um,
and I also have been writing,
I wrote the graveyard book and I'm writing the current novel in a,
uh,
these beautiful books that I bought in a stationary shop in Venice,
um,
built into a bridge summer in Venice.
There's a,
there's a little stationary shop on a bridge and they have these beautiful
leather bound blank books that just look like hard back books,
but they're blank paper pages.
And,
uh,
I wrote the graveyard book in one of those,
I bought four of them and now I'm using the next one on the next novel and it
may well go into another one.
Um,
I'm not sure.
And then at home in my home,
my house in Wisconsin,
which is where my stuff is,
you know,
I've,
I've got my,
we live in Woodstock,
um,
but I have an entire life's worth of stuff still sitting in my house and in
Wisconsin and it,
it's become archives.
It's essentially kind of fabulous having a house that is an archive.
Um,
but waiting for me in that house
is a book that I bought for myself about 25 years ago.
And before I die,
I plan to write a novel in it.
Um,
and it's an accounts book from the mid 19th century.
It's 500 pages long.
Every page is numbered.
Um,
it's um,
lined with accounts lines but pretty faint so it'll be nice to write a book in
it and it is engineered so that every single page lies flat and it's huge and
it's heavy and it just looks like a book.
But you know,
Dickins or somebody would've written a novel him and I've just been waiting
until I have an idea.
Bit is huge and weird and Dickensian enough and whether or not actually get to
write it in dip pen,
I'm not sure,
but I definitely want to write it in a sort of um,
old Victorian something slightly copper plating,
one of those old flex nib pens that they stopped making them carbon paper came
in.
Um,
just so I can get that kind of spidery Victorian handwriting.
I'm just imagining you putting pen to the first page when you finish the first
page and what that will feel like.
That's going to be a good day.
It will,
it will be either a good day or an incredibly bad days.
I'll get to the end of the first page.
It's,
oh no,
I have this pristine,
but it is,
it is the,
the thing that I tell young writers and by young writers,
young writers can be any age.
You just have to be starting out.
Um,
which is anything you do can be fixed.
What you cannot fix is,
is the perfection of a blank page,
but you cannot fix is that pristine unsullied whiteness of a screen or a page
with nothing on it because there's nothing that affects,
you mentioned the word and it might be that I'm a little slow moving because I'm
from Long Island,
but lifetime.
How do you spell [inaudible]?
That one.
L,
e,
I s c h I think is tt t.
U.
R m
and then 1917,
I think is the,
the uh,
their Twitter handle is definitely liked to him.
1970.
I'll put that in the show notes for folks so you'll be able to find it.
Since you gave me a,
and I'm not intending to turn this episode into a shopping list,
but I've never used fountain pens.
Really.
I have not.
And My,
my uh,
assistant,
my dear assistant,
uh,
does,
she loves using found pence.
She enjoys the act.
I've,
I've had,
uh,
a few sloppy false starts and then been rather impatient.
But if I wanted to give it a shot,
are there any particular fountain pens or criteria that you would use and
picking?
I'm good pen.
You know,
the biggest criteria I would use in picking,
um,
if you have the choice is go somewhere like New York's Fountain Pen Hospital.
Um,
is that a real place?
It's a real place.
It's called the Fountain Pen Hospital.
They sell lots of new pens.
They recondition old pens.
They look after [inaudible],
um,
and try them out because the lovely thing about fountain pens is they are
personal.
You,
you,
you can,
no,
no.
And then you find the one,
um,
I tend to suggest to people who are,
uh,
just nervously,
you know,
I've never used a fountain pen.
What should I do?
And I will point them out.
Lemy Lam,
why?
Um,
who have some fabulous startup pen and they're not very expensive and they're
good.
They do a pen called the law,
the safari,
but they have a bunch of good,
good startup pens and they're just nice to,
to get into the idea of do I like doing this?
Um,
the,
um,
okay,
let's see.
What am I using right now?
Um,
what am I going here?
I've got heel.
So,
um,
this one here is a pilot.
Um,
it's a Namiki and it's a flexing them ever so slightly.
When you put down and weight on it,
the uh,
the nibble spread.
Um,
it's a beautiful,
beautiful pen.
Um,
though that one's a pilot.
I think this one here is the Namiki and it's really weird because Namiki is
pilots.
I,
I don't quite understand that this is,
maybe it's a sort of Toyota Alexis thing,
I think it is.
It's that kind of thing.
Um,
and this one here is called a falcon.
And again,
you put a little bit of weight on it and the line we'll just spread and thicken,
which is part of the fun,
um,
of fountain pens.
Um,
and I will just,
you know,
I'll,
I'll go and play a,
there's a lovely Italian,
when I got my Aa,
my agent,
I did a thing some years ago when I realized that I was losing a lot of actual
writing time to signing foreign contracts.
And um,
this is for books,
this is for books or occasionally,
you know,
for stories or things being reprinted around the world.
And the contracts would come in and there would be big sheaves of them because I
get printed all around the world and foreign contracts,
a lot of them,
you have to sign a lot and you have to do a lot of initialing and,
and I would sit in that going,
I am just spent 19 minutes signing a pile of contracts.
And I loved that.
I got to sign it.
But,
so I contacted my agent,
I said,
can I give you like power of attorney?
Would you mind?
Just,
can you just sign these things for me?
And she's like,
absolutely great.
And so I got to,
she'd never used a fountain pen and I got her a fountain pen.
I actually went to uh,
The New York Fountain Pen Hospital with her and did the thing of showing her
pens,
you know,
what do you like can then,
and I got her a viscosity,
which is just these lovely Italian pens.
Um,
and mostly I love the sort of,
the slightly fetishistic bit of having bottles of beautifully colored ink.
When you start talking to fountain pen people,
they,
they really,
they pretend to be interested in what Penn you like,
but they don't care because they found their own pens that they love.
And they said,
what do you use?
And I,
you know,
I use pilot eight to two threes for signing.
And I actually now I bought a pilot take two,
three.
Um,
cause it's just a fantastic signing pen.
It's a work course.
It keeps going.
And I got one in 2012
and it was my signing pen.
I signed through ocean at the end of the lane,
you know,
before the book had come out,
I'd already pre-signed,
you know,
written my signature 20,000 times with this pen and seen footage of you icing
your hand after signings.
That was the signing tool that I really got into icing my hand because,
and wrist and arm.
Um,
and you know,
I did the numbers and as far as I can tell,
I have signed about one and a half million signatures with that pen,
uh,
which remained and I had to send it off to pilot at one point,
not because the NIB was in trouble because the,
the plunger mechanism was starting to stick and they fixed it for me and sent it
back.
And then my three year old son found a place behind a cast iron fireplace in our
house in Woodstock.
If you just insert your father's pilot three pen,
which you have found on the table just to see if it would go in there,
you can actually guarantee that nobody without disassembling the house,
we actually have to take the entire house apart.
Um,
do uninstaller a cast iron fireplace from 1913 to get at the pens I've gotten
that is that pen now has been given as a sacrifice in their house goods and I
need to get a new,
it strikes me at least it seems as we're talking that many of the decisions
you've made,
the tools you've found an enlisted,
uh,
act to
not writing unappealing or at least boring after five minutes and to in to sort
of enhance the act of writing to make it something that is enjoyable.
I don't know.
That's true.
It is true.
But they also exist for another reason,
which is kind of weird,
which is to try and trivialize what I'm doing and not make it important and
freighted down with weight because that paralyzes me.
Um,
when I started writing,
I had a typewriter.
It's a manual typewriter.
When I sold my first book,
I have the money to buy an electric typewriter.
Um,
what was that first book?
Uh,
Gosh,
I actually don't remember whether I bought the electric typewriter with the
money from a book called ghastly be unbelief book of science fiction and fantasy
quotations.
I did with Kim Newman or whether I did it,
whether it was,
um,
for,
uh,
that Yuran Duran biography that I did,
either way,
I was just 23.
And,
um,
and what I would do back then is I would do my rough draft on scrap paper,
single spaced so that it couldn't be used.
Um,
and also so that I could get as many words on and,
you know,
paper was expensive.
Um,
and then so,
so I could always do that.
And I remember the joy of getting my first computer and just the idea that I
wasn't making paper dirty,
nothing mattered until I press print.
And that was absolutely Natalie liberating.
Um,
and then,
you know,
a decade on
picking up a notebook,
it was for star dust of which I decided that I wanted the rhythms of star dust
to be sort of very antiquated rhythms.
And I thought
there's probably a difference to the way that one writes with a fountain pen.
Um,
17th century writing,
17th,
18th century writing,
um,
you notice tends to go in very,
very long sentences and long paragraphs.
And I,
my theory about this is that one reason why you get this is because you're using
dip pens and if you pause,
they,
they dry up cause he just have to kind of keep going,
forces you to do a kind of writing where you're just,
you're gunning for a very long sentence and you're going to go over a long
paragraph and you're going to keep moving in this thing and you instead of
thinking ahead,
um,
with,
if you're writing on a computer,
you'll think of the sort of thing that you mean and write that down and then
look at it and then fiddle with it and get it to be the thing that you mean.
If you're writing and fountain pen,
if you do that,
you just wind up with a page covered with crossings out.
So it's actually so much easier,
um,
to just sort of think a little bit more.
You,
you slow up a bit,
but you're thinking the sentence through to the end and then,
then you start writing,
you write that and then you pause and then you write the next one.
Um,
at least that was the way that I hypothesized I might be writing and I wanted,
uh,
start us to feel like it had been written in the late 1920s.
Um,
and I thought,
well,
to do that I should probably get myself a,
uh,
a fountain pen and a book come out.
So that was how I started writing that.
And again,
what I loved was suddenly feeling liberated was like,
ah,
I'm not actually making words and not going down in [inaudible] on a computer
screen.
This trivializing is,
I think,
very,
very important.
Uh,
and I'd love to dig into it a little bit because this is something that's come
up quite a bit initially,
very unexpectedly with,
with people I interview on the podcast and we're having conversation with Sean
White,
you know,
legendary snowboarder.
And I asked him what he said to himself,
what was his internal monologue or dialogue right before the gate opened for the
last run in the Olympics for the gold medal.
And his answer was,
who cares?
Yeah.
Which surprised me.
And he said,
yeah,
because if,
if in effect it,
if I apply an incredible amount of weight to myself,
it's going to do nothing but handicap me.
And you do see,
or if there are many examples of,
of writers of musicians who have such crumbled with Sophomore Syndrome after a
success and had great difficulty put it,
putting out work.
You've put out a lot of very,
very good work.
I've,
I've read and listened to and watched a lot of your work.
What are other things you do to remove that weight,
if anything?
Are there things you say to yourself when you commit to writing a book?
When you,
when you sign the agreement with the publisher for yet another novel,
uh,
is,
is there any other advice that you would give or any other things that you do
that helped to remove the sort of psychological,
uh,
performance anxiety?
Well,
you're,
me,
you tend to do the things that are not actually,
um,
financially sensible but make life easier.
I write,
I like writing things that nobody's waiting for.
It's much more stressful writing things that people actually are waiting for
that people care about.
Um,
it's why
it felt wonderful to follow American gods up with Caroline.
Nobody even knew that I wanted to be a kid.
So author and it was an odd kind of thing to be.
And I've just written this giant novel.
It's one,
all of the awards and it's incredibly ADOT and it's thick and it's a proper
book.
And look,
I got the Hugo and look,
I've got the nebular and so on and so forth.
And then,
um,
here's a book nobody's waiting for about,
did you work on,
so you worked on that before.
Anyone knew?
In other words,
you hadn't set expectations.
Caroline was written.
I felt Caroline was unpublishable.
In fact,
I was told it was initially.
Um,
and uh,
I,
I started it for my kids.
My daughter in particular,
Holly.
Um,
I showed it to an English editor who told me it was completely unpublishable.
Uh,
we moved to America.
Um,
the idea was that I was writing in my own time,
but I didn't have any own time.
Somewhere in there.
I sent it to my friend Jane Yolan,
I mentioned to Jane,
who was amazing children's,
um,
author,
but also at the time was editing a line of books and she showed it to,
she wanted to buy it.
And the people upstairs at the publishing house said,
absolutely not.
And,
and you know,
this was just the first third of Carolina hadn't even got bad yet.
Um,
and,
uh,
and I put it away.
And then
a few years on I looked around and realized that I now had another daughter.
I now had Maddie and she was a baby and she was getting bigger.
And if I didn't finish that book is this book I started for Holly and now
Holly's two old almost,
and I needed to finish it.
So I sent it to my new editor,
but I sent it to my ad out to editor.
I didn't have a children's editor,
um,
Jennifer Hershey at,
uh,
at trying to remember what we at Harper Collins at the time or was it still a
Avon?
I think it was still a fun,
haven't yet been.
They even got bought by Harper Collins,
which is how I became a Harper Collins author.
And she read it and she called me up and she says,
this is great.
What happens next?
And I said,
send me a contract and we will both find out so and bless her.
She did.
And so I went back to writing it because now it was actually something that
actually had a delivery date attached.
And I did not have the time to write it in.
It wasn't like I have more time.
And I remember what I did was I had a notebook by the side of my bed
and instead of reading three or four pages a night and then turning off the
light and going to sleep,
I would write maybe 50 words of Coraline,
which doesn't seem much right before bed right before bed.
So I wasn't right a reading before bed,
I was just writing before bed.
But I go to bed and I would reread what I'd written on Carolina and I would do,
you know,
five or six lines of Coraline.
Um,
but if you do it in that way,
you know,
you've written a page a week.
And so it,
it,
it kept moving forward.
And then we went on a cruise,
a fundraising cruise for the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund,
which is a first amendment thing.
And I was working on American gods and I did not pack due to a packing error,
be American gods notebooks,
but I did have the car line book with me.
So on that cruise I got to write quite a bit more Coraline.
And then a couple of months later I was done in a despair of ever finishing
American gods because I've been writing it by that point for at least 18 months
and figured that I had about a year to go and uh,
just said fuck it and wrote Coraline and just finished it and sent it off to my
publisher.
And it's like,
here is a book,
you can publish this.
And they're like,
that's great,
but we'll,
we'll wait for American girls.
Do you tend to work on multiple projects at once?
Is that used to?
I used to be really good at working on multiple projects at once.
I think
I have to start,
um,
I think I have to start accepting that I'm not as good anymore at that.
Um,
what does that mean?
It means that in the old days when I was young,
I would have at least three things on the go,
which was great because if I got stuck on any one of them,
I would do the other.
Um,
even when I was writing American gods,
I would always have the next of the sort of the coming to America short stories
in my head.
So if I got stuck on shadow,
I would just take a week and I do one of the coming to America stories and then
I go back to shadow again.
But
these days I don't think I'm as good at that anymore.
I think I am.
Um,
I think it's great to have three or four things going on.
But there is that point,
my stopped looking at myself and going,
actually I'm getting less done.
I'm not doing that thing where I get stuck on project day.
So I just immediately nip over to project B.
It takes me a little ramping up time to get to the headspace.
Now Project B and at the point where I have projects,
a,
B,
c and d all waiting for me,
what I do is look at them,
make a noise like lurch from the Addams family.
You go on those
Oh
kind of noises like off and make a cup of tea and a plate with ash or something.
Um,
so I think actually I,
it's one of those things where you just know thyself.
I think I now have to start to going no,
just,
just one thing at a time,
which also means I am,
I'm going to have to say no to more introductions and things.
Yeah.
Because,
and I love doing introductions.
Aye.
Engines.
You mean writing introduction,
writing introductions,
writing introductions to other people's work,
writing introductions and essays and things.
Where you go,
here is the thing I love.
I want to,
I can get it to the world.
I can tell people why I love this thing and maybe they'll discover it.
And every now and then and you know,
sometimes you know,
your introduction makes no real difference in the scheme of things.
Um,
and then sometimes,
uh,
you know,
James Thurber,
um,
I was told I could bring,
you know,
that they would bring them the 13 clocks back into print if I wrote an
introduction to it.
So it was like,
yes,
I'm writing an introduction to it and then because it has an introduction by me,
I've run into many hundreds of people who I assume are representatives of
thousands of people,
um,
over the years who've said,
I picked up that book because your name was on the cover.
And Oh my God,
it's become my favorite book.
And I read it to my kids,
it's amazing.
And I go,
good.
That's,
that's what it's for.
And that's why you do this.
You mentioned,
uh,
writing right before
bed.
So I'd love to talk about the
be,
not the scheduling,
but the timing of writing.
So I was,
was doing prep for this conversation and it came across an interview in which
you said that for,
for nonfiction,
you can kind of write wherever it happens to fall off.
It's a script or something else,
but that for novels,
very often you tend to write between say one and 6:00 PM where you'll handle
email,
maybe writing a blog post and so on the morning.
And,
uh,
I'd love to chat about that because,
many of the writers I've spoken to,
and I'm sure it's,
it differs person to person,
but tend to write either very late or very early because they feel like they
avoid distractions.
Yeah.
When I started out,
um,
from,
from the age of about 22 when I was a young journalist,
26,
27,
uh,
starting out comics writer,
um,
you know,
all through that I was a late,
late,
late night writer.
Um,
nothing really happened until the kids were in bed.
Nine o'clock,
I might have faffed around a little bit during the day,
but now
it's all done and now I'm getting down to work and um,
uh,
two or three o'clock in the morning and I'm writing in England at this point,
I may phone a friend in America just to talk enough to make sure that I'm awake.
Um,
but so that's what I did.
And um,
and I was a smoker and a coffee drinker and it was great.
I moved to America in 92.
I gave up smoking s 93,
um,
stop drinking coffee when over the t,
and tried being a late night,
right.
Try and carrying on being a late night writer and gradually realized that I
wasn't really any more.
What tended to happen was somewhere around one in the morning I'd be writing
away and then I would lift my head from the keyboard at four o'clock in the
morning and have 3000 pages of the letter m and it just go okay.
That it doesn't really work anymore for me.
And then I started reshuffling.
I'm trying different things out.
Part of
what I discovered,
particularly about being a novelist is writing a novel works best if you can do
the same day over and over again.
Hmm.
Um,
the closer you can come to just groundhog day,
you just repeat that day.
You,
you've set up a day that works for yourself.
Um,
you know,
I,
the last novel that I actually wrote,
um,
I was at Tori Amos is wonderful house in Florida.
She has this lovely,
so to house on the water that she's lent me many times to go and write in.
Um,
and I went down there and I would get up in the morning,
I would go for a jog,
come back,
um,
do my yoga,
uh,
get dressed.
Um,
and,
and getting the car drive down to a little cafe,
whether it were just enough people around that I knew that other people existed,
but nobody that I would ever be tempted to talk to.
And I would order myself a cup of Large Cup of green tea,
sit in the corner and just start writing.
And I would do that day over and over and over and over.
And you know,
a couple of months later I looked up and I had the ocean at the end of the lane,
which was only meant to,
I'm going a short story anyway.
It just kept going.
Um,
and I,
I,
that I think works really,
really well.
I also think that the,
the most important thing for human beings is to be aware of the change.
You know,
the,
the biggest problem we run into is going,
this is who I am.
This is what I'm like,
this is how I function.
While failing to notice that you don't do that anymore,
I'm perfectly aware that I may one day become one of those people who wakes up
early in the morning and goes and writes.
Um,
my friend Jean Wolfe,
who is
now in his late eighties and is one of,
um,
you know,
the finest writers that America has.
Um,
for years was a,
an editor of a magazine about factories,
I think it was called plant engineering.
And so he'd get up at four o'clock in the morning and write for an hour
before anything else before the day started,
before he had to leave.
For Work and before anybody else was up.
And that was how he did it.
Um,
I cannot imagine getting up in the morning and just writing,
not how my head works.
I need a while to get here.
Um,
but I can absolutely imagine that one day I'll,
I'll have become one of those morning writers from having been a late night,
right to in my youth and an afternoon writer and my,
in my middle age in my dotage I could absolutely become,
I'm wanting right
in your dotage.
Uh,
I think that's going to take a while.
I do want to ask you a question related to a name that came up a little earlier
and that is
this,
of course I think I'm getting right because it comes from a reliable source,
which is your blog and get a pretty reliable,
it's very reliable.
And,
uh,
for those,
those who know your work outside of the blog and it really encouraged to,
to read some of your work on the blog,
there's some really touching personal work,
uh,
one in particular about,
your gorgeous white dog whose name I'm currently,
just such a beautiful piece,
uh,
that uh,
in fact,
um,
I will you thanks for,
because it led to,
in part there are many factors,
but to me getting my first dog as an adult Mali,
which I put off for decades.
So thank you for that.
But this question,
beautiful piece is,
is related to Holly.
And I'm going to use this as a very sneaky way to ask you a question that you'd
probably dislike being asked.
And it involves 57 year olds.
So my understanding is you were convinced to speak to daughters class about
where ideas come from and uh,
what I,
what I noted here,
I'm not going to ask it that way,
but the,
the line that stuck out was you get ideas when you ask yourself simple
questions.
Well,
what if dot,
dot,
dot.
What if you woke up with wings?
If only if only real life was like it is in Hollywood musicals.
I wonder.
Dot,
dot.
Dot.
If this goes on,
this is one I really liked.
You know,
if this goes on telephones are going to start talking to each other and cut out
the middleman.
Wouldn't it be interesting if dot,
dot,
dot.
Uh,
in,
in the,
the question I'm going to ask as a follow up,
it doesn't have to map perfectly to this,
but,
uh,
I would love to hear the genesis story of the graveyard book.
And the reason I asked you about that book specifically is that it is my,
my absolute favorite,
uh,
fiction audio book of all time and to this is,
I remember the exact moment when I finished the graveyard book in audio.
And there are multiple versions of people who ask me,
I have not listened to the ensemble version and I'm sure it's spectacular,
but not,
not to sound creepy.
I do find your voice very soothing.
And I finished it as my plane was not my plan.
Let me rephrase as a plane was landing and that a few minutes before we landed
and I thought about the book.
So it's,
it's,
it's had a,
a wonderful place in my heart and my mind.
Where did that book come from?
Yeah,
it's actually,
I can give a slightly better answer to that now that I could have done a year
ago or I have done for previous years because I found something accidentally,
uh,
recently,
um,
which
was,
uh,
which gave me an insight into stuff on it.
So
I was 25 years old.
Um,
it would have been 1984 or 85,
maybe even eight into 86.
Um,
I was living in Sussex and a little town and a very tall house.
my dad owned the house.
Uh,
actually what he owned was a shop underneath,
but the house sort of keen came with it.
Um,
because little old English towns go back for a long time.
The house was at least 300 years old,
um,
and it was across a little lane from a country graveyard and the house was
incredibly tall,
an incredibly thin.
You get a couple of rooms and then you get stares.
And I had a son who at that point was two years old,
um,
and his favorite thing was his little tricycle.
And the problem with little tricycles is you cannot ride them around houses like
that.
Otherwise you die,
you get the stairs and you die.
Um,
and so every day I would take him and his little tricycle over the road to this
little church yard and he would peddle happily round and round the paths
through the gravestones.
And I remember just the,
the thought process,
I remember going,
he looks so happy.
Yeah,
it looks really comfortable.
There was something very sweet about it.
A little kid riding a tricycle through a graveyard
and I thought I could do a story about it.
Wouldn't it be fun to do a story about that?
You could do a story like a,
it will be like,
can I have a kid in a graveyard getting brought up by dead people?
And then I thought,
well actually Kipling already kind of did that once with the jungle book,
which is a kid in a jungle being brought up by wild animals and teaching him the
things that wild animals.
No.
So I wouldn't have to have a kid in the graveyard being taught the things that
dead people.
Now
I went up to my office,
my little office sat down at my typewriter
and started to,
right now when I'm told people this in the past,
I've said I wrote a couple of pages and realize that it wasn't good enough and I
was wrong.
I actually wrote an entire first chapter I discovered because about a year ago
looking for something else,
I found it
and uh,
wasn't pretty good.
What was fascinating and delightful about it was the port trait of the kid,
which was very obviously a really actually looking back on it,
quite good pen portrait of my son Mike,
who is now a that you did that.
I'm describing the baby and I only knew one.
So,
so it's,
it's Mike.
Um,
and that was really interesting.
But story doesn't work.
And I think,
I forget,
I think I've got a,
um,
there's this,
there's a demon in it.
I don't have,
um,
who I think is the person who winds up being the person who kind of accepts him
into the grave yard.
Um,
you know,
nothing's quite right,
but the,
there's a central idea there.
But I wrote,
I remember writing that and just going,
okay,
this is a better idea.
Um,
I am a writer.
Hmm.
So I need to put this off.
I'm about,
yeah.
A decade later I came back,
tried it again,
and this time,
you know,
at least according to memory,
it was only a couple of pages.
And again,
I went,
oh no,
still not good enough for this.
May I pause for one second?
Yeah.
You must have ideas for potential stories all the time.
But this was different.
This was one where I knew,
I knew it had legs and I knew it was real and I knew it was good.
Um,
and in fact,
uh,
you know,
it was interesting,
there was a point where I thought I wasn't going to do it,
and I kind of gave the idea to Terry Pratchett.
We've been,
we've had our photos taken in a graveyard and it would,
we were talking about graveyards and kids,
and I said,
well,
there's this book that I was going to write and this is what I was going to do
in it.
And what is lovely is Terry didn't do any of that,
but he took,
he wrote a book called Johnny and the Dad,
which was
sort of taking some of this stuff,
but it wasn't close enough that I couldn't then still do my story.
Um,
but what was great is I knew that this was still important and I still wanted to
tell the story.
And over the years I would just let it accumulate.
And finally,
um,
in about 2003,
I finished writing,
I think it was an NC boys,
which I also listened to an audio.
Ah,
Lenny Henry,
isn't it brilliant.
Ratable incredible.
Such a great read.
Um,
and I got to the end of Anansi boys and I thought,
you know,
I,
I definitely,
I'm getting any better.
I think this is now as a writer,
um,
probably me,
it's probably it,
I may improve even a tiny bit,
but it's not going to be the leaps and bounds.
And I know that I was,
so,
I have absolutely no excuse for putting off the graveyard book.
But what I've started the other two times and it didn't work.
I started with chapter one.
I'm going to start right in the middle and I wrote the first two pages of,
um,
of,
of the witches headstone chapter four,
and did emotionally exactly the same thing.
I always do.
I had always done at that point where the graveyard,
but we just got,
it's just not good enough.
It's not good enough.
My daughter Maddie,
because at this point we're on,
we're in the Cayman Islands on a small holiday.
Me,
Maddie,
and Holly.
Maddie comes out,
let's see,
one does over to me and says,
well,
what are you doing?
I said,
I'm writing a story.
She says,
read it to me.
So I read her the first page and a half that I'd written
and she said,
what happens next?
So I kept going and I think I would,
I would absolutely have been capable of giving up and failing at that point,
except Maddie wanted to know what happened next.
So I kept drinking and by the end of that I'd written a story that felt like it
worked.
I had the tone,
I had the voice,
I had Silas,
I had all of that stuff.
What is the range character,
by the way?
So lovely Silas.
And then I started at the beginning and I,
and the the,
the one thing that I have no idea where it came from because it was just sitting
in the notebook when I came to star.
It's like I'd written it at some point in the previous
five years knowing that it would be,
you know,
knowing that I would have to stop at some point was just the line.
There was a hand in the darkness,
net held a knife.
And knowing that that was the first line of the story and feeling kind of,
you know,
having very mixed feelings about that because going well on the whole,
this story is going to be very loving.
It's going to be very tender,
it's going to be about growth,
it's going to be about families,
it's going to be about villages,
it's going to be about people.
But the first few pages are going to be absolutely terrifying.
And that was the first line.
Yeah,
I think you did.
You certainly delivered on the first few pages being very,
very terrifying.
I'm going to go back and listen to that again.
Maybe I'll try ensemble this time around
the ensemble is real.
I mean,
you know,
I,
um,
I'm,
I'm not just saying this because for me,
you know,
listening to one of my own audio books is a lot like back when you were young
and we had answering machines and you would be listening to the messages people
had left for you and then you'd suddenly hit your own voice and it's just like,
no,
I don't sound like that.
Um,
but I,
but it's Derek.
Jack Kirby,
who was one of England's greatest actors as the narrator,
you,
the cast of people like Miriam Margolyes,
[inaudible] Smith,
just this fabulous gassed.
So
you mentioned a name that I was planning on bringing you up anyway.
And that is Terry Pratchett.
Yeah.
And I think many people who at least in the United States are less familiar with
Terry then perhaps they should be.
Uh,
could you tell us who Terry is and how you first met
Terry Pratchett?
Um,
later,
Sir Terry Pratchett was an English writer who died in March,
2015.
Um,
he was a humorist,
a satirist,
best known for the Discworld novels set on a flat earth,
which is on the back of four elephants on the back of an enormous turtle
swimming through space.
And,
uh,
he was my friend.
Um,
Terry and I met
when his first book,
first Discworld book.
The color of magic was due to come out in paperback.
And,
uh,
we met for years and years.
We would tell everybody we met in a Chinese restaurant.
And,
uh,
again,
a few years ago,
I found my desk diary from 1985 and I thought,
ah,
there's Terry and me meeting in February,
uh,
1985.
I wonder which,
um,
Chinese restaurant,
it wasn't,
it turned out we actually met on like the 28th of January and it was Berta
rallies,
Italian restaurant in Gooch's street.
I think it was cute street.
Um,
improving the memory is gloriously fallible.
embarrassingly so since I'd actually filmed a piece to camera in a Chinese
restaurant,
um,
about Terry's passing,
but it's,
you know,
I was a young journalist,
Terry at the time was working as the press officer for the,
uh,
central electricity board in the UK.
And,
um,
we hit it off in a way that it's just that sort of thing.
We go,
oh,
you have the same kind of mind that I have.
Not exactly,
but the Venn diagram of overlap is,
it was the point where we got onto the subject of green was of account books.
Um,
and Terry mentioned that he had come up with one code,
the net crow telecom,
nickel on the book of the telephone numbers of the dead.
And I said,
that's really weird.
I've just come up with one called the lever full.
Virome Haggen are from the book of yellow colored pages.
And it's going,
oh,
we have the same kind of head that goes to the same kind of places.
And we became friendlier,
a friendlier,
after awhile,
Terry would start sending me his books to read as he was writing them.
Um,
you know,
uh,
a floppy disk would arrive and it would have 30,000 words on it of a novel,
or my phone would ring and Terry would say,
oh,
it's me.
So,
which is funny,
and they just be writing and he wants somebody to talk to.
So
I had written,
um,
a book called don't panic,
the hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy companion,
uh,
which was great.
I got to work with Douglas Adams.
I've got to rummage through Douglas's filing cabinets and obscurity stuff.
I'd written the whole book of,
uh,
who was and what hitchhikers was.
And I realized by the end of it that I could write in that style classic English
humor with funny footnotes and things like that.
That was,
it was something I could do.
And I had an idea for a book
inspired really by,
um,
reading the Jew of Malta.
I've been reading,
uh,
Malos the Jew of molter and there's just a line in it where these evil Jews mate
and they compare evil that they've done.
And I thought,
you know,
you could do that scene with demons and it will be really nice if
you got demon number one who's done lots of evil.
Demon number two has done lots of evil and evil demon number three.
He just hasn't really,
you know,
and that was the start.
So I wrote and I had this idea about a baby swap,
kind of like the omen,
but it all goes wrong and it becomes a nice kid.
So I wrote 5,000 words of um,
this thing and I sent it to a few friends to look at and then Sandman and books
and magic took over my life and my time and
didn't really think about it.
I knew that it was a thing and I knew I get to it one day and then I got a phone
call from Terry.
How much later was this?
Maybe eight months,
nine months.
And he said that that thing you sent me,
you doing anything with it?
And I said,
well,
no,
I'm doing Sandman.
I'm doing,
but it's magic.
And he said,
well,
I know what happens next.
So either Salamay the idea and what you've written so far.
Oh,
we can write it together
now as far as I was concerned,
that was a lot like Michelangelo ringing you up and saying,
Hey,
do you want to paint a ceiling together this weekend?
You know,
young,
I,
I loved Terry's craft.
Terry became somewhere in the,
before the arrival of JK Rowling,
the bestselling novelist in the UK,
I mean,
tens of millions of copies,
millions upon millions of copies.
Um,
this was before that,
this was,
you know,
he just retired from,
um,
the,
the electricity board to become a full time writer.
I knew how good he was
and I'm like,
this is a fabulous apprenticeship.
So even though I didn't have the time,
I said yes and my life,
you know,
I back on it.
I'm just really glad that I was 27,
28 when I was doing this because I couldn't do it now.
I mean,
just physically and mentally couldn't do it now.
But I would write Sandman until midnight.
I would write the books of magic from midnight until about two 30 and I would
write good omens from two 30 until about 6:00 AM.
And then I would get up at one o'clock in the afternoon and my aunt swimming,
she answering machine would have a little blinking light on it and I would press
the button and the tape would rewind and then Terry Pratchett's voice would come
out of it and he'd go,
get up,
you busted.
I've just written a good bit.
And,
you know,
that was a,
so that was,
that was the process of writing was very fast,
very mad.
Um,
I was the first draft,
second draft took us,
took us much longer.
Um,
but you know,
we,
we had good omens.
We have this wonderful,
incredibly collaborative book.
Um,
it was almost immediately bought by Hollywood and Terry and I went out and had
one of those hellish or for Hollywood experiences that you laugh at when other
people tell you in their store is about them because you're like,
I can't be that bad.
And it's like,
no,
it really is that bad.
It really was that bad.
Um,
and then
over the years,
Terry Gilliam and tried to make it into a film,
which we,
we loved the idea of,
uh,
then we were going to do it as a TV series and we couldn't really find somebody
to adapt it.
And eventually Terry,
Terry and I had a deal that we would never do anything individually on good
omens that had to be together or not at all.
Okay.
And then one day he emailed me and uh,
he said,
look,
you have to do this.
Okay,
you have to do this because you're the only other person who has the same amount
of love for an understanding of the old girl that I have and I want to see it
before the lights go out.
And then,
and I said,
okay.
And then Terry died,
which meant that now had become this sort of last request.
And if the upcoming good omens series is good,
which I believe it is,
a lot of what makes it good.
A lot of what,
cause I was the show runner,
I wrote it and I show ran it.
But I think what makes it good is I wasn't prepared to compromise on it.
And I am normally very prepared to compromise.
I'm encouraging when other people want to bring ideas to the table.
I'm like,
yeah,
go do something fun with this.
I've already done the book or whatever.
But in this case I had a Terry Pratchett in the back of my head who I had to
please.
And,
you know,
the producers would say,
well,
Neil,
I know you've written this sequence where agonist nutshell the,
which is taken out and burned and it's,
you know,
we have villages and we have,
it's the 1640s and you've got a Jon Bon fire and an explosion and all of this
kind of stuff.
And,
and,
um,
we felt we could save a lot of money and do it just as well if we had woodcuts
of what happened and the narrator telling the story.
And I would be like,
okay.
And then I would stop.
And I would think,
what would Terry think about that?
I'm like,
Terry would have nothing polite to say about any of these people.
And it's like,
you know,
I'm sorry,
we're going to have to do it the way I wrote it and the way it is in the book.
We're not doing it with woodcuts.
And,
um,
and it was like that all the way through and was like,
you know,
just trying to hold the line and make this thing that Terry would have been
proud of,
um,
using,
using stuff that we came up with.
Um,
in the book using stuff that we'd come up with,
talking after the book,
stuff that we would have put into the next book if there ever had been one.
Um,
and just making it all,
all something that Terry would have been proud of.
Um,
and it's been really wonderful.
This south by southwest has been the first time anybody has seen anything from
good omens and we showed some clips.
Am hearing audiences laugh?
Um,
what's kind of amazing?
I was like,
oh,
it does work.
It is.
They're liking it.
They're loving it.
It does work.
You should me only a very short clip,
but I know the book and I'm familiar with it.
And with,
with the work you've done or any work or characters I deeply care about,
I collect comics from my entire childhood,
still have probably 10,000 polybag comics that I refuse to get rid of.
And every time a comic book movie would be made in my younger years because they
were not done generally very well,
I would sort of peek through a crack in my fingers to see how characters would
turn out.
And it was,
it was always a very stressful for me because it's so much invested,
uh,
in many different characters.
And I'm just,
I'll give,
uh,
a thank you to Hugh Jackman,
forgetting,
uh,
Logan and Wolverine.
Right.
Which was a huge relief.
And seeing this clip,
it,
it really gave me the feeling that you had pulled it off,
that it,
that it lived up to my experience as a reader and a listener.
I think mostly we have,
um,
and I think that is a lot of that is costing,
Michael Sheen and David Tennant
what perfect.
And they've never really been any and anything before.
Um,
because they go up for the same parts because they have very similar actors and
people were like,
why would you cost them?
Why don't you go,
it's like costume,
the same person you can.
Well,
yeah,
kind of is actually,
and it's one of the reasons why it works so well.
They have joked about,
and I'm not showing if they're joking about,
if ever I write a stage play version of good omens,
they would go on tour with it.
An alternate roles each night.
Brilliant idea.
Wow.
I want to,
uh,
well first I should say,
and we'll put this certainly in the show notes and everywhere else and in the
people will have already heard in the introduction,
but where,
where can people learn more about good habits?
Uh,
that's a really good question.
Well,
the,
you know,
one thing that I would recommend you do is read the book,
um,
uh,
good omens,
the novel by Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman.
Uh,
and it won't spoil anything for you with the TV show.
There's enough stuff in there that I put in for people who knew the book.
I kind of,
there,
there are Easter eggs in the wet.
Only somebody who's read the book will know that something is funny or know why
something's happened.
But there's also things that people who read the book will not be expecting.
So that's,
that's the first thing.
Um,
youtube or any Amazon prime ads have the ad for good omens up the trailer.
You can go and watch that.
Um,
it's a lot talk here than the trailer.
The trailer is,
is a lot of it is things going bang,
because that's what they like putting in trailers.
If it were me,
I would,
my trailer would have just been so to have like,
you know,
three minutes of two characters talking and it's like,
Hey,
you go here is the trailer if you like this,
you like the show.
Um,
but I think very wisely they put in,
you know,
giant walls of Fire and heaven and Hell and hell hounds and,
and all of the Gloria stuff.
You mentioned a word,
uh,
apprenticeship.
What are the types of things that you learned from Terry or picked up?
The biggest thing,
looking back on it,
that I learned from Terry was a willingness to go forward without knowing what
happens.
You might know what happens next,
but you don't know what happens after that.
But it's okay because
yeah,
you're a grownup and you will figure it out.
Um,
there's lots of metaphors,
um,
for writing a novel.
And George Rr Martin,
for example,
divides writers into architects and gardeners.
Okay.
I can be an architect if I have to,
but I'd rather be a Gardner.
I would rub up,
plump the seeds,
water them,
and figure out what I'm growing as they grow and then prune it and trim it and
uh,
you know,
pleat Shit,
whatever I need to do,
um,
to make something beautiful that appears intentional.
But at the end of the day,
you have to allow for accidents and randomness and just what happens when things
grow.
Okay.
So the joy of good omens really.
I mean,
the best thing about good almonds was having Terry Pratchett as an audience
because if I could make Terry laugh,
I knew,
you know,
that,
that it's like hitting that bell in,
in,
you know,
hitting the thing in the circus with the hammer.
If you bring the bell at the top.
And that's what I did when I could make Terry laugh.
He is no longer with us.
And uh,
I'd be curious to know how he faced mortality it because I,
I,
for instance,
have Alzheimer's on both sides of my family.
So I've had the opportunity to observe people with Alzheimer's,
which is,
it can be very,
very difficult.
How did he,
how did he approach his or his own mortality?
Terry made out of stone.
Dashingly powerful.
He,
I mean,
he,
he faced it head on and he made,
uh,
two or three incredibly powerful documentaries,
one about Alzheimer's.
Um,
the one that ripped me up emotionally,
um,
was the one about assisted suicide was the one about the right to die,
which Terry became a very firm believer in and made his film as a,
as a piece of polemic about should you be,
should you be allowed to turn off?
Should he be allowed to go kid,
this is the situation I'm in and I'm in this body.
I am done.
And uh,
okay.
You know,
he followed a man to Switzerland where he,
he went through the end of life process and they turned off the camera as well.
He did.
Um,
and it was incredibly moving.
Terry,
the last time I saw him
confided in me pretty proudly
that he did have the,
the Death Cup tail
and,
uh,
that it was hidden away,
but then it was there for him when he was ready.
And I knew at that moment he was never going to take it
because Terry had a kind of rear brain Alzheimer's memory was basically okay,
but shapes weren't,
the physical world had fallen slightly apart on him.
Um,
you know,
he couldn't see things.
He couldn't perceive objects.
He,
he could still think straight.
But,
but all of your spacial recognition,
all of your object recognition and stuff was failing.
And I thought,
even if you've got this stuff,
you never,
you can't find it.
You can't get something from a hidden place.
Nobody else is going to get something from the hidden place for you.
I don't want.
So
I thought,
and you've hit,
you're now actually beyond the point where you ever wanted to be.
You can want to be here.
You wanted to have stopped
four or five months ago,
but now you're here and if you're here,
you're here to the end.
And indeed,
a few months later he fell into one consciousness and
a few months after that he stopped completely.
Um,
but it was inspiring.
It was inspiring.
Watching Terry
talk about Alzheimer's,
bringing the Alzheimer's,
which everybody has to deal with one way or the other,
into the public consciousness as something that was okay to talk about,
not as something slightly shameful that happens to grandpa.
Um,
and also just talk about the right to die and talking about it as a,
as a human right.
And it
okay.
You know,
I,
I really,
and I understand or you know,
you can list out to me all of the reasons why it's a bad idea and look,
you know,
here's a creepy family and if they could kill mum for the money,
they wouldn't right now they've got her in a home,
but you know,
they,
they would have killed her and announced that she wanted to do it herself or,
or whatever.
I get all that,
but also
I get that,
um,
the right not to be alive,
the right to did all the right to go,
okay,
I've,
I've come as far as I can in this.
Um,
and it's okay to stop before,
before
I become something that is a shallow shadow of who I once was.
Um,
you know,
that that then has to be a right to,
okay.
How does it feel as,
as such a close friend of his to be able to,
to share this work that you created together and really,
really weird.
The,
the,
um,
mostly it's wonderful and then sometimes it isn't.
And,
um,
Saturday night
Amazon had taken over a,
you know,
19,000 square foot lot,
turned it into the garden of earthly delights.
Um,
it has a bookshop in a corner and the hairdressers and a giant tree in the
middle that serves alcohol,
it has wings that if you stand in front of them and activate some kind of
Instagram filter,
um,
or maybe it was a snapchat filter,
will make the wings start to flap.
Um,
oh,
you know,
just filled with wonderfulness that I'm there and that we have singing nuns and
then a queen cover band.
Come on and I'm looking around and there's Jon Hamm and
David Tennant,
Michael Sheen and the,
Oh my,
my guys from my lovely,
um,
American gods cast come over and they're hanging out.
I'm getting to introduce,
it's like introducing it to families.
And,
um,
I was kind of melancholy because
I knew that I should just be enjoying it.
I knew I should just be gone.
This is,
this is magical,
this is,
this is the kind of fun,
wonderful thing that you,
you don't get very often in your life and I should just be exulting in it.
And instead,
I'm just thinking always Terry were here,
he would have loved the nuns.
He would've,
he would've had a great time with the queen cover band and he would have been
just,
you know,
grumbling to me about tiny details and enjoying it.
Um,
or,
or taking enormous pleasure in tiny details and you know,
having,
deciding which color wings he liked having best or whatever,
he would have loved it and he's not around.
And then by the same token,
I know Terry well enough to also know the,
the way that Terry was built and who Terry was,
we probably would never have got to this point had Terry been alive.
Because
if you're doing something like making a big TV show or something,
something this big and this complicated where things can go wrong.
Sometimes when things are getting weird or things are going wrong or you know
the BBC are going a bit mad or whatever,
the only thing you can do is just focus on the outcome and just keep going and
keep steady course and so on and so forth.
And I knew Terry well enough and work with Terry Long enough to know that he was
absolutely constitutionally incapable of doing that.
Know at the point where things,
any,
any one of a dozen places where all we would have to have done is just keep on
going.
And you know,
Terry would have been making the,
the phone calls to the head of the BBC or the head of Amazon or you know,
telling Jeff Bezos exactly what he thought of him,
what it was just like no,
that just the wrong thing to do right now.
So there's also that sort of witness of going
had Terry Bunner and we probably would never have got here
and getting,
but getting here was all about making this thing for Terry,
which he also wasn't here for,
which is why I'm saying I,
you know,
so,
so at,
at giant interwoven panoply of,
of strange emotions,
absolute joy and having made it joy and having made it for Terry because,
um,
nothing else would have stopped me writing novels for three and a half,
four years.
Um,
but that did,
I think I have to imagine he'd be thrilled to see you in this amazing circus,
uh,
just before this piece of work is released to hopefully millions more people who
will be impacted by the work
I think.
And I think he would have loved,
I think he would have loved so much of this and also being Terry,
he would have loved the fact that then people will come and pick up good omens
the book and then they'll go and read Discworld books and that will make Terry
even happier.
Neil,
this has been so much fun.
Cool.
19 minutes already.
90 minutes that just that that flu
it did.
It did.
And I certainly hope it's not the last time we have a chance to have to do it
again.
I'm just about to start.
I would really love to and uh,
I know we have,
well let me not state it that way.
Many,
many of my fans are your fans and just as Terry shared his gifts with the world,
you continue to share yours and it has an impact.
It helped me through some very tough times.
I was able to transport me,
delight me,
shock me,
scare me,
and take me through a whole range of emotions I didn't at the time,
even though I had access to.
So I want to thank you for making good art and sharing it with the world.
You've done a great job.
You are so ridiculously welcome.
Thank you.
And do you have any
closing comments,
thoughts,
remarks,
anything you'd like to say before we wrap up?
No,
not really.
I,
I'm,
you know,
I genuinely enjoy,
enjoyed.
One of the great things about having you as a fan is the books arrive from you
and they actually get read.
Um,
I'm,
you know,
and I learned from them because you go off and explore parts of things that I'm
never going to.
And so I appreciate that too.
Enormously.
Thank you so much.
And for everybody listening,
we will include links to everything we've discussed,
including Fountain pens,
including Fountain Pants.
It's might be the time to buy some stock
and everything that came up.
We'll be in the show notes as always at tim.blog/podcast.
You can just search Neil or gay men and it will pop right up and to Neil.
Once again,
thank you so much.
I really,
really appreciate it.
And to everyone listening,
until next time,
read widely and check out good omens and chat soon.
Bye.